Welcome... to another episode of Shiloh Creek....Where the water runs slow, the friends look out for each other, and every story starts here — pondside — with me.
I'm Old Timber....The elephant elder....And today's story...is the morning a bear cub tried to lead his friends to the old barn... by a path the storms had rearranged in the night... and learned what it means to stop trying to see all of the way... before you start walking.
Today, my friends... I want to ask you something....An old saying in the Bible — from King Solomon, who was famous for being wise — once said it like this....What does it mean...to trust... in the Lord... with all your heart?...To stop leaning on your own understanding...when the way you were going to walk... isn't there anymore?...Listen carefully....The answer is in the story.
Now... gather round, friends. Come close by the pond.
Old Timber!...Old Timber!...Is this the BARN one?...The one where I LEAD?
Mm....Yes, Bongo....It is the barn one....Settle in.
Now... settle in....Here we go.
Now, this was a couple of weeks back, on a soft late-summer morning when the sun was still low, and the air smelled the way air smells when the storms have come through in the night — sharp green, like fresh-broken leaves, and a little wet on every stone... and the path was different.
And the friends were going to the old barn.....The old barn, my friends,...sits on the far side of the wood — past the big old oak,...past the footbridge,...past the rocky bit,...and out into the meadow....It's the late-summer gathering place.
Now... ordinarily... that walk takes maybe half an hour....It's a path the friends know well....You all know it,...your paws know it,...your hooves know it,...your slow tortoise feet know it....On any other morning, you set out, and you arrive, and you sit down, and there you are.
But not this morning....This morning, my friends,...there had been a storm in the night....Not a frightening storm — the trees and the friends slept right through it....But a storm enough... to take down a big old branch... and shift the path... right where it bends past the big old oak.
And down at the pond end,...where the Mudpuppies have their puddle — the big new puddle, that some of you may remember from a different morning a couple of weeks back — the Mudpuppies were doing what the Mudpuppies do after a storm....Which is mostly...puddling....Splash was inspecting a new leaf in the puddle....Splish was reporting on the weather to the leaf....Splosh was telling them both that the wind had moved the puddle three inches to the left....They were not coming to the barn this morning....But they were having... a lovely time.
Now, this is where things got interesting...
And over hopped Bongo the bear cub, with his usual cheerful crash — paws first, plans second — carrying, of all things, a small folded leaf in his paw....Bongo took one long look at the path ahead and he said,
Friends!...Friends, I have THE MAP!...I drew it last night!...With a charcoal stick!...It is a VERY good map!...I have the PATH....I have the OAK....I have the FOOTBRIDGE....I have the ROCKY BIT....I have the BARN....I got this!
And Zippy the hummingbird darted in — three places at once before she settled — and she squeaked,
Wait — wait — I just had SEVEN ideas!...Bongo — I made a backup map!...Three backup maps!...Path-A is the path.... Path-B is if the path is blocked....Path-C is the river-route in case path-B is also blocked....Path-quality-index four-point-seven on Path-A, but acorn-coefficient is point-two so —
Zippy....Zippy I just have ONE map.
One is fine!...One is GREAT!...One is the most efficient number of maps!
And Garingo the parrot — the dear theatrical thing — came swooping in on a low branch and announced,
BEHOLD!...A QUEST is upon us!...The QUEST...to the OLD BARN!...Friends — wayfarers — ADVENTURERS — the path ahead...is the path...of LEGEND!
And Shelly the tortoise — wise old Shelly — stepped slowly into the gathering, carrying, as she always does, exactly one small acorn in her mouth.....She set it down. She looked at the leaf-map. She looked at Bongo. She looked at the path. And she said,
...Bongo....The leaf-map....Is upside down.
......Wait —...what?....No — wait — it's not....I drew the BARN on the TOP....The barn... goes... on...the... top....The barn ISN'T on the top.
And then — the smallest of the friends — Fern the fawn — came stepping out from behind the willow, the way she always does now, more steady on her hooves than she once was, and she looked at the path and she said, very quietly,
Um....The path is wet....And the stones moved.
Fern!...Hi Fern!...The map has the path on it though, see?....It's a VERY good map.
TO THE PATH, friends!...TO THE OAK!....TO THE FOOTBRIDGE!....TO THE — GLORIOUSLY — KNOWN BARN!
And so the friends set out....Five of them....On a path... that was not... quite... the path... it had been.
Now... this is the part of the story... where the well-known path stopped working.
The friends walked, and they laughed,...and Garingo recited the QUEST in five-syllable phrases,...and Zippy ran through her three-tier path-quality matrix,...and Bongo led at the front with his leaf-map upside-up....And about ten minutes in,...they came to the bend by the big old oak....And there — across the path — was a great fallen branch....Not a small branch....A big, old, sleeping-on-the-ground branch....The path... the path everyone knew... was on the other side of that branch....And you could not go through.
Now... old paths and storms have always done this to each other....The Bible has a saying about it, my friends —...about leaning on your own understanding, and what happens when your understanding meets a fallen branch....I'll come back to that... at the end....For now — the friends were stuck.
And here is what happened next....Bongo — the dear earnest thing — looked at the leaf-map....He looked at the branch....He looked at the leaf-map....He looked at the branch....And he did what Bongo does....He made a NEW plan.
FRIENDS!...I got it!....We CLIMB the branch!....I'll go first!....I got this!...I am going — OVER — the BRANCH!
And Bongo — with his usual cheerful crash — went up the branch... and ran into a low limb... and the limb gave him a thump... right on the forehead.
Ow....Wait — OW — that's...the branch is fine....The branch is fine.
....Bongo.....The branch...is fine.
Okay — okay — NEW plan....We GO AROUND....We go LEFT — because Path-B-left has a thirty-seven-percent better surface-traction-coefficient — wait — no — RIGHT is better — unless the river-route is faster — BONGO — do you have your charcoal stick?
Friends!....BEHOLD....A FORK!....Two paths!....Left....AND right....THIS....IS....THE FINAL FORK!....CHOOSE...WISELY!
...Garingo.....It is not...the final...fork.....There are at least...three more...forks.....I have seen them.
Okay — okay — let me re-draw the map....Zippy — charcoal stick — I'll just — we'll just — we'll —
Um....I don't think the leaf-map has this part of the woods.
Now, my friends... Old Timber, who had been walking quietly at the back this whole time — because Old Timber walks SLOWLY — stepped forward, and put a gentle trunk on Bongo's shoulder, and said,
Bongo, my friend....Take a breath, dear earnest creature.....Put down the leaf-map.....For just one minute.....And ask the Lord to show you the way.
But — Old Timber...I'm supposed to be...the LEADER....I'm supposed to know the way.
Mm....Leading...isn't always knowing the way, my friend.....Sometimes...the leader...is the first one to stop....Sometimes...the leader...is the first one to listen.
And here, my friends... is the smallest, quietest moment of the whole story....Bongo... looked at the leaf-map.....He looked at the branch.....He looked at Old Timber....And for the first time in his bear-cub life... he stopped trying to figure it out.
He put the leaf down.....On the wet stone beside him.....And just... breathed.
And then — nothing.....Just the woods.....Just the morning.....Just a small cub... and the trees... and the wet stones... and the friends... all standing quiet, because Bongo had gone quiet.....And in the quiet... he heard something he had not heard all morning.
—
...And what Bongo heard... was the smallest, quietest sound...... A trickle of water...... Down by his paws...... Going the other way around the branch.
......Oh.....Oh — friends....There's a path.....A small one.....Under the branch.....Beside the trickle.
I knew....I noticed it... before, but I didn't know what it was....It's where the water went.
...Mm.....Yes, little one....The water always knows where the path is.....And sometimes, my friends... the smallest among us... hears it first.
Wait — wait — the trickle-path?...The TRICKLE-path is not on any of my three backup maps!...The trickle-path is a FOURTH path!...I did not... model... a fourth path.
FRIENDS!....I AM HAVING...AN EPIPHANY!....The path...was BENEATH us...THE WHOLE TIME!....A PATH...OF HIDDEN...DEPTH!....Oh, that's good....I should write that down.
Wait — what's a...piph-uh-nee?
Mm....An epiphany, my friend...is when you suddenly understand something....Like a tiny light...coming on...inside your head.
....Garingo.....The path...was always there.....You did not...have...an epiphany.....You followed...a small bear cub...who heard...a trickle.
Friends!....Friends — I did not... figure it out....I just... stopped....And the trickle was right there.
Bongo —...you didn't stop....You... listened.
......Oh.....Yeah.....I listened.
And so the friends followed Bongo — who was, for the first time today, walking SLOWLY — down the small trickle-path, under the great fallen branch, around the bend, past the footbridge, past the rocky bit, and out... into the meadow on the other side....Where the old barn was waiting....Just like it always is.
Later that afternoon, my friends... when the friends were sitting in the doorway of the old barn... watching the late-summer light come slanting in through the doorway... I asked them one question....I said,...What made today work?
And Zippy — still slightly bewildered — said,
I had three maps....And the answer was a path I never modelled....And Bongo found it by being QUIET, which is not a known navigational strategy....I should add that to the model.
And Garingo — deeply pleased that there had been a quest — said,
Friends....I have learned....that THE QUEST...sometimes ends...by a path...that is...much smaller...than the QUEST.....I am not...above this.....I am...growing.
And Shelly — with the small acorn now placed beside her in the doorway — said,
...Bongo.....The leaf-map.....Was actually...quite a good map.....Just —...not enough for today.....And that is...the difference...between a good map...and trust.
And Fern — who had been quietly noticing things all day — said,
Maybe... trust...is when you stop trying to see the whole way... before you start walking.....And you let God... see the parts you can't.
...Mm...Now, isn't that something...Funny how it's the smallest voices that hold the biggest truths...That's how I remember it, anyway...Now — dear friends — there's one more thing today...Down at the pond, while we were all walking back...the Mudpuppies were having... an episode.
MUDPUPPY MINUTES!....I'M SPLISH!....AND TODAY'S TOPIC IS — BEING LOST!
I'M SPLASH!....AND BEING LOST...IS BETTER...THAN BEING FOUND!....BECAUSE —...IF YOU'RE LOST —...EVERY DIRECTION...IS A NEW DIRECTION!
I'M SPLOSH....AND BEING LOST...IS HOW...THE PLACE...FINDS YOU.....YOU DO NOT FIND THE PLACE.....THE PLACE...FINDS YOU....IT'S ALSO LIKE A BELL.....ON A COLD ROCK.
LIKE A BELL!....ON A COLD ROCK!
SHINY....LOUD....COLD....THAT'S A BELL....ON A COLD ROCK.
ANYWAY —...IF YOU GET LOST —...JUST PUDDLE!....PUDDLING IS HOW...WE...DO IT.
PUDDLE!....WITH FRIENDS!....IF FRIENDS ARE LOST TOO...EVEN BETTER!
AND THAT...IS...HOW...A PLACE...FINDS YOU.....CLASS DISMISSED.....I MEAN — SHOW...DISMISSED....IT WAS A SHOW.....NOT A CLASS.
...Mm....Well.....The dear chaotic creatures....A place does sometimes find you, my friends — if by 'place' you mean 'puddle'....But the kid listening at home....The actual lesson today....Was Bongo's....And it was not 'puddle'....Although....Sometimes....It IS puddle....For the Mudpuppies.....I'll take it.
Old Timber —...what did we learn today?
Mm....We learned, my friends... that trust is when you stop trying to see all the way ahead....The leaf-map is a fine thing....The leaf-map is a GOOD thing....And sometimes, the path you can see... isn't the whole path....And the way becomes clear...as you walk it....Not before.
And there's an old, old saying in the Bible, my friends —...from King Solomon — who was famous for being wise — in the book of Provurbs....Trust in the Lord...with all thine heart....And lean not...unto thine own understanding....In all thy ways acknowledge him....And he shall direct thy paths.....Which, my friends,...is just an old way of saying — trust God even when you can't see the path....Don't pretend you know....Tell him you don't know....And he will show you the way.
Mm....You know, my friends...the most important moment in the whole story...was a small one. Bongo couldn't see the path....So he didn't pretend....He stopped...and let the Lord show him a way he couldn't draw....That's the verse, lived....That's trust in the Lord, my friends — in actual life.
And that's what Bongo did this morning, my friends....He stopped....He told the truth — that he didn't know.....And the path he could never have drawn... found him.....That, my friends,...is Trust in the Lord — leaning on God, who sees what we can't.....Lean not on your own understanding — stop pretending to know the way.....Acknowledge him — say, quietly, 'Lord, I don't know.'....And he directs the path.
[excited]...Old Timber?...What does that LOOK like?...In an actual day?...For somebody who is listening right now?
Mm....Well, friend....This week,...when you don't know what to do —...when the new game stops working,...or the schoolwork is too much,...or a friend is upset,...or the morning just isn't going the way you planned —...try Bongo's two small things.....First — stop.....And acknowledge him — that means tell God you don't know.....It's a prayer....Lord — I don't know....Help.....You can say it on your own,...or a grown-up can say it with you.....Second —...tell a grown-up you trust.....A parent,...a teacher,...an older friend....What you're stuck on....Out loud.....And the path becomes clear...as you walk it....Not before.
Until the next breeze brings us together, my friends....Walk softly out there, little ones.
See you next time... somewhere in Shiloh Creek.